README.markdown, before:

# Gibberish - Encryption in Ruby made simple
![Travis](https://secure.travis-ci.org/mdp/gibberish.png)

### What
Gibberish is an opinionated cryptography library for Ruby. Its objective is easy but secure
encryption in Ruby.

### Why
While OpenSSL is an extremely capable encryption library, it lacks a terse and clean
interface in Ruby.

### Goals
- This library should remain easily iteroperable with the OpenSSL command
line interface. Each function will include documentation on how to perform
the same routine via the command line with OpenSSL

- It should default to a reasonably secure setting, e.g. 256-bit AES, or SHA1 for HMAC
But it should allow the user to specify a stronger setting, within reason.

- Procedures should be well tested and be compatible with Ruby 1.8.7 and 1.9


## Requirements

Ruby compiled with OpenSSL support

## Installation

    gem install gibberish

## AES

Defaults to 256 bit CBC encryption

    cipher = Gibberish::AES.new("p4ssw0rd")
    cipher.enc("Some top secret data")
    #=> U2FsdGVkX187oKRbgDkUcMKaFfB5RsXQj/X4mc8X3lsUVgwb4+S55LQo6f6N\nIDMX

    cipher.dec("U2FsdGVkX187oKRbgDkUcMKaFfB5RsXQj/X4mc8X3lsUVgwb4+S55LQo6f6N\nIDMX")
    #=> "Some top secret data"

To encrypt / decrypt a file

    cipher.encrypt_file("secret.txt", "secret.txt.enc")

    cipher.decrypt_file("secret.txt.enc", "secret.txt")

Gibberish AES is fully compatible with default OpenSSL on the command line

    echo "U2FsdGVkX187oKRbgDkUcMKaFfB5RsXQj/X4mc8X3lsUVgwb4+S55LQo6f6N\nIDMX\n" | \
    openssl enc -d -aes-256-cbc -a -k p4ssw0rd

    openssl aes-256-cbc -d -in secret.txt.enc -out secret.txt -k p4ssw0rd

[Find out more](http://mdp.github.com/gibberish/Gibberish/AES.html)

## RSA

    k = Gibberish::RSA.generate_keypair(1024)
    cipher = Gibberish::RSA.new(k.public_key)
    enc = cipher.encrypt("Some data")
    # Defaults to Base64 output
    #=> "JKm98wKyJljqmpx7kP8ZsdeXiShllEMcRHVnjUjc4ecyYK/doKAkVTLho1Gp\ng697qrljyClF0AcIH+XZmeF/TrqYUuCEUyhOD6OL1bs5dn8vFQefS5KdaC5Y\ndLADvh3mSfE/w/gs4vaf/OtbZNBeSl6ROCZasWTfRewp4n1RDmE=\n"
    cipher = Gibberish::RSA.new(k.private_key)
    dec = cipher.decrypt(enc)

[Find out more](http://mdp.github.com/gibberish/Gibberish/RSA.html)

## HMAC

Defaults to 128 bit digest and SHA1

    Gibberish::HMAC("key", "some data")
    #=> 521677c580722c5c52fa15d978e8656341c4f3c5

Other digests can be used

    Gibberish::HMAC("key", "some data", :digest => :sha256)
    #=> 01add3f98ce4d49403d98362a046c6cca2c79d778426282c53e4f628f648c12b

[Find out more](http://mdp.github.com/gibberish/Gibberish/HMAC.html)

## Digests

    Gibberish::MD5("somedata")
    #=> aefaf7502d52994c3b01957636a3cdd2

    Gibberish::SHA1("somedata")
    #=> efaa311ae448a7374c122061bfed952d940e9e37

    Gibberish::SHA224("somedata")
    #=> a39b86d838273f5ff4879c26f85e3cb333bb44d73b24f275bad1a6c6

    Gibberish::SHA256("somedata")
    #=> 87d149cb424c0387656f211d2589fb5b1e16229921309e98588419ccca8a7362

    Gibberish::SHA384("somedata")
    #=> b6800736973cc061e3efb66a34f8bda8fa946804c6cc4f26a6b9b3950211078801709d0d82707c569a07c8f63c804c87

    Gibberish::SHA512("somedata")
    #=> a053441b6de662599ecb14c580d6637dcb856a66b2a40a952d39df772e47e98ea22f9e105b31463c5cf2472feae7649464fe89d99ceb6b0bc398a6926926f416

[Find out more](http://mdp.github.com/gibberish/Gibberish/Digest.html)

## Run the tests

    git clone https://github.com/mdp/gibberish.git
    cd gibberish
    bundle install
    rake test

## TODO

- Cover OpenSSL exceptions with more reasonable and easier to understand exceptions.

Commit message:

Update about key stretching and next version plans

README.markdown, after:

# Gibberish - Encryption in Ruby made simple
![Travis](https://secure.travis-ci.org/mdp/gibberish.png)

### What
Gibberish is an opinionated cryptography library for Ruby. Its objective is easy but secure
encryption in Ruby.

### Why
While OpenSSL is an extremely capable encryption library, it lacks a terse and clean
interface in Ruby.

### Goals
- This library should remain easily iteroperable with the OpenSSL command
line interface. Each function will include documentation on how to perform
the same routine via the command line with OpenSSL

- It should default to a reasonably secure setting, e.g. 256-bit AES, or SHA1 for HMAC
But it should allow the user to specify a stronger setting, within reason.

- Procedures should be well tested and be compatible with Ruby 1.8.7 and 1.9


## Requirements

Ruby compiled with OpenSSL support

## Installation

    gem install gibberish

## AES

Defaults to 256 bit CBC encryption

    cipher = Gibberish::AES.new("p4ssw0rd")
    cipher.enc("Some top secret data")
    #=> U2FsdGVkX187oKRbgDkUcMKaFfB5RsXQj/X4mc8X3lsUVgwb4+S55LQo6f6N\nIDMX

    cipher.dec("U2FsdGVkX187oKRbgDkUcMKaFfB5RsXQj/X4mc8X3lsUVgwb4+S55LQo6f6N\nIDMX")
    #=> "Some top secret data"

To encrypt / decrypt a file

    cipher.encrypt_file("secret.txt", "secret.txt.enc")

    cipher.decrypt_file("secret.txt.enc", "secret.txt")

Gibberish AES is fully compatible with default OpenSSL on the command line

    echo "U2FsdGVkX187oKRbgDkUcMKaFfB5RsXQj/X4mc8X3lsUVgwb4+S55LQo6f6N\nIDMX\n" | \
    openssl enc -d -aes-256-cbc -a -k p4ssw0rd

    openssl aes-256-cbc -d -in secret.txt.enc -out secret.txt -k p4ssw0rd

(Note: OpenSSL "enc" uses a non-standard file format which lacks [key stretching](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Key_stretching), this means less secure passwords are more susceptible to brute forcing. The next version of Gibberish will include key stretching but will break compatiblity with OpenSSL. This change will be a major version bump to 2.0)

[Find out more](http://mdp.github.com/gibberish/Gibberish/AES.html)

## RSA

    k = Gibberish::RSA.generate_keypair(1024)
    cipher = Gibberish::RSA.new(k.public_key)
    enc = cipher.encrypt("Some data")
    # Defaults to Base64 output
    #=> "JKm98wKyJljqmpx7kP8ZsdeXiShllEMcRHVnjUjc4ecyYK/doKAkVTLho1Gp\ng697qrljyClF0AcIH+XZmeF/TrqYUuCEUyhOD6OL1bs5dn8vFQefS5KdaC5Y\ndLADvh3mSfE/w/gs4vaf/OtbZNBeSl6ROCZasWTfRewp4n1RDmE=\n"
    cipher = Gibberish::RSA.new(k.private_key)
    dec = cipher.decrypt(enc)

[Find out more](http://mdp.github.com/gibberish/Gibberish/RSA.html)

## HMAC

Defaults to 128 bit digest and SHA1

    Gibberish::HMAC("key", "some data")
    #=> 521677c580722c5c52fa15d978e8656341c4f3c5

Other digests can be used

    Gibberish::HMAC("key", "some data", :digest => :sha256)
    #=> 01add3f98ce4d49403d98362a046c6cca2c79d778426282c53e4f628f648c12b

[Find out more](http://mdp.github.com/gibberish/Gibberish/HMAC.html)

## Digests

    Gibberish::MD5("somedata")
    #=> aefaf7502d52994c3b01957636a3cdd2

    Gibberish::SHA1("somedata")
    #=> efaa311ae448a7374c122061bfed952d940e9e37

    Gibberish::SHA224("somedata")
    #=> a39b86d838273f5ff4879c26f85e3cb333bb44d73b24f275bad1a6c6

    Gibberish::SHA256("somedata")
    #=> 87d149cb424c0387656f211d2589fb5b1e16229921309e98588419ccca8a7362

    Gibberish::SHA384("somedata")
    #=> b6800736973cc061e3efb66a34f8bda8fa946804c6cc4f26a6b9b3950211078801709d0d82707c569a07c8f63c804c87

    Gibberish::SHA512("somedata")
    #=> a053441b6de662599ecb14c580d6637dcb856a66b2a40a952d39df772e47e98ea22f9e105b31463c5cf2472feae7649464fe89d99ceb6b0bc398a6926926f416

[Find out more](http://mdp.github.com/gibberish/Gibberish/Digest.html)

## Run the tests

    git clone https://github.com/mdp/gibberish.git
    cd gibberish
    bundle install
    rake test

## TODO

- Cover OpenSSL exceptions with more reasonable and easier to understand exceptions.
